Ltnews40 intro, corrections and some reordering (#1512)
latex3/latex2e: base/doc/ltnews40.tex

\medskip

\section{Thirty years of \LaTeXe{}}

Summer 1994, i.e., thirty years ago, \LaTeXe{} saw its first public
release. Back then it was meant to be a intermediate version (hence
the $\epsilon$) on the way to a major new version (the mythical
\LaTeX3) that we expected to take a couple of more years to reach

> maturity. It took more much than that in the end\Dash nominally,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
maturity. It took much more than that in the end\Dash nominally,
```

(u)p\TeX{}, as we don't use these programs nor have in depth knowledge
of their functionalities. To the best of our knowledge, core \LaTeX{}
works well with these engines, but if and to what extent tagging can
be supported will remain to be seen. If relevant information becomes
available to us we will provide an update in future editions of the
\LaTeX{} newsletter.

\subsection{Tagging support for external packages}

At \url{https://latex3.github.io/tagging-project/tagging-status/} we
show the status of many \LaTeX{} Packages and Classes with respect to
PDF tagging.  We also started to improve tagging support in external
packages. If the \texttt{firstaid} key is used in addition to the
\texttt{phase-III} key basic commands of packages including
\pkg{amsthm} and \pkg{fancyvrb} can now be used.

\subsection{Improved table tagging}

The tagging of tabulars has been extended: it is now possible to tag
row headers and to create cells that span more than one row.

The interface to this functionality is not finalized but can be
accessed in the current release by specifying the row and columns to
be treated as headers.

\begin{verbatim}

> \tagpdfsetup{

Reviewer 2: Reminds me I want to talk generally about setting keys - one for a team meeting!

 table/header-rows={1,2},
 table/header-columns={1} }
\end{verbatim}
Would specify that in the following tables the first two rows and
first column of each row should be tagged as heading entries.

Similarly you may add a RowSpan attributes to tag a cell that spans
two rows using:
\begin{verbatim}
\tagpdfsetup{table/multirow={2}}
\end{verbatim}

\subsection{Automatic MathML tagging}

> When lua\LaTeX{} is being used and the \pkg{luamml} package is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When Lua\LaTeX{} is being used and the \pkg{luamml} package is
````

available and if the document uses the \pkg{unicode-math} package,
then the math module will automatically convert each math formula to
MathML and use it to attach MathML associated files (or MathML
Structure elements) to the tagged PDF. This new feature can be disabled
with \verb+\tagpdfsetup{math/mathml/luamml=false}+ More details can be
found in the documentation of \pkg{latex-lab-math}.

\subsection{Change behavior of tagging sockets with two arguments}

When calling tagging sockets with two arguments using
\cs{UseTaggingSocket} when tagging is suspended previous versions of
\LaTeXe{} dropped both arguments.  This behavior has been changed to
drop the first argument and preserve the second one instead, thereby
allowing tagging sockets to be used to wrap existing content which
should still appear in a non-tagging context.

> Since no tagging sockets currently provided by \LaTeXe{} use two

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since no tagging sockets currently provided by \LaTeX{} use two
```

maturity. It took more much than that in the end\Dash nominally,
\LaTeXe{} is still with us today.

However, under the hood, \LaTeXe{} changed a lot throughout these
thirty years as one can see, for example, when looking through the
forty newsletters~\cite{40:ltnews} that accompanied the \LaTeX{}
releases that happened in the meantime.

During the first two decades, the \LaTeX{} kernel was kept largely
stable with only minimal bug fix activities. During that period
additional functionality was mostly provided through new or
extended packages that could be loaded in the document preamble. This
included many of the ideas targeted for \LaTeX3{}, e.g., \pkg{expl3}
(\LaTeX3 programming language), \pkg{xparse} (new document command
interface), \pkg{xtemplate} (a configuration mechanism), and many
others.

Initially, this approach worked well and provided good backward
compatibility; however, over time it became apparent that keeping all
developments confined to packages got more and more problematical.
Features or bug fixes that should have been generally available, i.e.,
being part of the kernel, were only available in packages, so a lot of

> dependencies between packages where introduced and resulted in

Reviewer 3: were introduced

convoluted code that was difficult to manage. For example,
\pkg{hyperref} had to rewrite a lot of kernel (and package) macros, so
the code and behavior of other packages had to change depending on
whether or not \pkg{hyperref} was loaded or not.

Thus, in 2015 the \LaTeX{} team decided to change the policy and
(re)start active kernel development, see~\cite{40:ltnews22}. To ensure
continuous backward compatibility we introduced at the same time the
\pkg{latexrelease} package that enables users to roll back changes to
the \LaTeX{} kernel to an earlier release, in case this is necessary
to successfully rerun a document produced at that time.

As a consequence of this policy change the last decade saw a larger
number of enhancements and corrections that were made part of the
\LaTeX{} kernel. Overall, we can confidentially say that new

> approach worked well and enabled us to modernize \LaTeX{} and ensure

Reviewer 3: that the new approach

\subsection{Provide counter representations for link targets}

To create unique target names for links the package \pkg{hyperref}
uses a special counter representation \verb+\theH+\meta{counter}. To
ensure that this counter representation exists, \pkg{hyperref}
redefined the commands \verb+\@definecounter+, \verb+\@addtoreset+ and
\verb+\refstepcounter+. This counter representation is also needed for
the Tagged PDF project and so these augmented command definitions
have now been incorporated into the kernel.  Thus from now on every
\verb+\newcounter{+\meta{counter}\verb+}+ will not only define
\verb+\the+\meta{counter} but also \verb+\theH+\meta{counter}.

\subsection{Extending \cs{refstepcounter}}

For many years, the package \pkg{hyperref} has redefined

> \verb+\refstepcounter+ and adds code that creates link targets. The

Reviewer: You jumped tenses here.
```suggestion
\verb+\refstepcounter+ and added code that creates link targets. The
```

Also if my grammar lessons from the back of my memory serve me well, correct tense here would be past perfect progressive, so this sentence should use

```
For many years, the package \pkg{hyperref} has been redefining
\verb+\refstepcounter+ and adding code that creates link targets.
```

\verb|document class '<pkgname>'| or \verb|package '<clsname>'|.  This
has now been corrected.
%
\githubissue{870}

\subsection*{Fix existence check of document environments}

\cs{NewDocumentEnvironment} and friends define (or redefine) a
document environment using the space-trimmed \meta{envname}, but the
existence check for \meta{envname} was done without space
trimming. Thus when the user-specified \meta{envname} consists of
leading and/or trailing space(s), it may lead to erroneously silent
environment declaration.  For example, in
\begin{verbatim}
  \NewDocumentEnvironment{myenv}{}{begin}{end}
  \NewDocumentEnvironment{ myenv }{}{begin}{end}
\end{verbatim}
the first line defines a new environment \env{myenv} but the second
line would check existence for \env{ myenv } (which is not yet
defined), then redefine \env{myenv} environment without raising any
errors.  This has now been corrected.
%
\githubissue{1399}

\subsection{Handling of global keys with spaces}

If the global (class) options contained spaces around key names,
\cs{ProcessKeyOptions} would fail to remove known keys from the list
of unused global options and \cs{OptionNotUsed} would mistakenly add

> space-surrounded key names to that list.  The first issue has been corrected as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
space-surrounded key names to that list.  The first issue was corrected as
````

> space-surrounded key names to that list.  These has been corrected as
> a hotfix in patch level 1 of the November 2023 release (but

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
space-surrounded key names to that list.  These have been corrected
as a hotfix in patch level 1 of the November 2023 release (but
```

Author: not quite, I think it should have been "This has" (the behavior changed = singular)

Reviewer 4: There are two cases here.
- one for `\ProcessKeyOptions`, fixed in patch level 1 of the November 2023 release and
- another for `\OptionNotUsed`, fixed in the upcoming release.

Author: right you are, but then I think it should be written a bit differently to make it clearer.

\githubissue{1000}

\subsection{Avoid code duplication in rollback}

When the kernel uses \cs{AddToHook} in a region that might be rolled
back (which happens in a few places) and a document requests a
rollback, then we have the situation that the hook already contains
code to which we added the same (or slightly different) code during
the rollback; this results in code duplication or, worse, in
errors. This has now been corrected by dropping any such code chunk
(if there is one) prior to adding the rollback code.
%
\githubissue{1407}

\subsection{Passing template keys using \cs{KeyValue}}

With the move of the template code to the kernel, some internal

> efficiencies were also made. However, there was an oversight in how

Reviewer: Not sure how this would be correct, but "efficiencies were also made" sounds wrong to me.

Reviewer 4: Online Cambridge Dictionary has an entry for "efficiency" as countable noun

> something that is done to avoid wasting time, energy, or money: [...]
> https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/efficiency

Author: wasn't my text -- @josephwright ?  (even if correct according to @muzimuzhi  I think most non-native speakers stumble)

Reviewer 2: It is correct, but if it's an issue we can change - perhaps
```suggestion
\subsection{Passing template keys using \cs{KeyValue}}

With the move of the template code to the kernel, internal structures
were reviewed to improve efficiency. However, there was an oversight in how
```

  \emph{\LaTeXe{} news 1--39}. June, 2024.
  \url{https://latex-project.org/news/latex2e-news/ltnews.pdf}

\bibitem{40:ltnews22} \LaTeX{} Project Team.

>   \emph{\LaTeXe{} news 22}. Januar 2015.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \emph{\LaTeXe{} news 22}. January 2015.
```
